# Accessible Photo Gallery Built In React

GitHub repo: https://github.com/rlefevre6505-mh/assignment-week6
Live page on Render.com: https://assignment-week6-n87c.onrender.com

# Reflections

I struggled more than with previous assignments, as although I have got the basics of the React aspects we have studied, I'm not yet confident in my understanding of some methods and not confident in utilising everything I've learned fully. Having said that, now that I am towards the end of the assignment work, I do feel more comfortable with React overall. I managed to set up the project and make some components easily, though in retrospect I would have preferred to use more components and break down the parts of the app more, for example, making the header with the search bar a separate component, and the thumbnail container.

Throughout the assignment I not only referred back to various workshops, but also made use of MDN, W3, FreeCodeCamp articles, and acouple of YouTube videos.

In terms of requirements achieved, I managed to implement useState and UseEffect as specified, used multiple components, used the .map method to render images, ensure all images had suitable alt text, allowed imaged to be displayed at a larger size by selecting the thumbnail, and implemented navigation with the tab, space and enter keys. For stretch goals, I used multiple useStates and dependencies in useEffects to manage some of the functional aspects of the page (including search functionality, which technically works but causes fullsize images rendered not to match thumbnails - more on this in the following paragraph), used the Unsplash API to fetch image data while keeping any keys in the .env file, and styled the page responsively, using vanilla CSS including use fo multiple grid layouts, flexbox sections and a few media queries.

The search function took quite a while to get working, but through this I gained a better understanding of useState and more experience with different applications of conditional rendering, as I had to think through the logic quite a bit to adapt what I had taken from tutorials to work as intended. Initially, although the search function updated a state to contain a filtered array of images, when clicking on one of the remaining thumbnails the fullsize image was almost always rendered as the image from the original array with the same index. I tried for quite a while to figure this out, and only after going over a lot of possibilities did I realise that it was a simple case of how I had set up fullsize rendering for the selected image, as this had not taken into account the second array of images.
Unfortunately, due to the Unsplash API providing a lot of data, but only the "alt" text in each object containing any usable text for matching search terms, there were no other tags or keywords to match the query with other than the alt description.

I found that the page would sometimes crash when typing rapidly in the search field, caused by the app trying to process the search query and update multiple states after each character entered. I looked into the issue and decided to try to implement debounce, but was not able to make this work in the time available. Instead, as a less elegant solution, I had the page display a placeholder image with text directing the user to clear the search to fix the issue.

I intended to make the gallery scrollable using the left and right keys, and on-screen buttons, but did not have much time to finish building this functionality once other requirements had been met. I was able to implement tabIndex on thumbnails, making the gallery navigable using tab, and with enter or space able to select an image from the thumbnails, so left keyboard navigation at that. I think the accessibility of the page is good as I tested it with a screen-reader, as well as running lighthouse and WAVE tests. Lighthouse also showed that page load performance was not great, but this was mostly due to the API fetch request and rendering a high resolution image on load.

If I was starting over I might style the page differently, making better use of flexbox and grid, as the responsiveness isn't as smooth as I would like, with media queries maybe a bit overused. If I had a little more time I would also have liked to make the search section hidden and accessible with a small button so it can take up less of the page. Starting from scratch, I would also definitely make better use of components to reduce clutter in app.jsx and improve readability, with thumbnails going into a thumbnail container component which is then passed to app.jsx (something I did start on adding in later in the process, but left due to prioritising other aspects), and the header/search section also as a component. I will definitely plan my next React app more like this.

I would like some feedback about how I could have gone about implementing debounce to help avoid the search function crashing, as I tried briefly but was pretty unsure. Also, is there any best practice or standard practice you can recommend in order to avoid the user seeing the content load in in the first few hundred milliseconds? I would assume rendering a loading screen in front of the content being loaded or something like that, but any other good options would be good to know about. Any other feedback on the code would also be great.
